Docs: New Guide for adding art/sprites to Stonesense (#5207)
DFHack/dfhack: docs/guides/stonesense-art-guide.rst

> .. _stonesense-art-guide:

Reviewer: now in `docs/plugins/stonesense.rst`, you can link to this guide with:
```
`stonesense-art-guide`
```

.. _stonesense-art-guide:

Stonesense art creation guide
=============================

> Understanding Sprites

Reviewer: Section headers should only have the first word capitalized

---------------------

> Understanding how Stonesense deals with sprites is central to anyone who wishes to modify the content.

Reviewer: This section should *start* with a definition of what sprites are, not end with it.

The scheme is not very complicated, and this guide will give a short introduction to how they work.
The way sprites are loaded is fairly generalized. With the exception of floors, which we will discuss later,
all sprites are 32x32 pixels big and come in groups known as Sprite Sheets. All sprites are loaded and

> rendered in 32-bit full-color PNGs.

Reviewer: should mention somewhere that these PNGs have transparent backgrounds

.. image:: ../images/stonesense-sprite-sample.png
    :align: left

Here's an example of a typical Stonesense sprite.

Note that, in order not to conflict with neighboring sprites, a sprite must actually be within a smaller

> area than its 32x32 block.

Reviewer: how much smaller?

> A template for the area used by most sprites is:

Reviewer: "most"? what are the exceptions?

.. image:: ../images/stonesense-sprite-template.png
    :align: left

The solid area is the floor space taken up by a sprite, while the dotted box indicates the volume above this
area corresponding to one z-level.

Sprite sheets
-------------

> There can be an arbitrary number of sprite sheets configured for Stonesense, yet some are always present as

Reviewer: "yet some are always present" implies that there are conditions where some sprite sheets are not used. What are those conditions?

they contain default sprites (see further down). Most of the content XML files allow users to specify sprite
sheets, and this is done by adding a file attribute to the content nodes. By convention sprite sheets should
be placed in their appropriate folder, with creature sprite sheets in the creatures folder etc.

Sprite index
------------
Sprite Index (sometimes referred to as Sheet Index) is a concept for referring to a specific sprite on a sheet.
The index starts with the upper left sprite which has index zero. It then increments to the right. Stonesense
is hardcoded to 20 sprites wide sheets, this means that the last sprite to the right in the first row has Sprite
Index 19. The first sprite on the second row has index 20. This boundary is hardcoded and changing the size of

> the sheet will not affect it.

Reviewer: so if the png is more than 20 slots wide, sprites in the extra width are not addressable? what if the sheet is less than 20 slots wide?

This image shows how sprites are indexed. Note: Grid added for readability.

.. figure:: ../images/stonesense-indexed-sprites.png
    :align: left

Specific sprite sheets
----------------------

> **objects.png** is the default sheet for buildings and vegetation. Also used for all hard-coded content, like default

Reviewer: you can add a hyperlink to the online files, e.g. https://github.com/DFHack/stonesense/blob/master/resources/objects.png

plants, the cursor, default walls and liquid.

**creatures.png** is the default sprite sheet for creatures. If no file is specified in a creature node, this is the
sheet it will use.

**floors.png** holds all the Stonesense floors. Unlike the other sprite sheet, this sheet is hard-coded with sprite
dimensions of 32x20 pixels.

> Stonesense is fully configurable in the way it renders creatures. No information is hardcoded, but rather loaded

Reviewer: what is the "way" that it renders creatures? does this refer to the sprite sheets, or something else?

Author: Oh, I meant to chop off that last bit until I was comfortable with my knowledge of how it actually works.

.. _stonesense-art-guide:

Stonesense art creation guide
=============================

Understanding sprites
---------------------

Understanding how Stonesense deals with sprites is central to anyone who wishes to modify the content. The
scheme is not very complicated, and this guide will give a short introduction to how they work. With the
exception of floors, which we will discuss later, all sprites are 32x32 pixels big and come in groups known
as Sprite Sheets. All sprites are loaded and rendered in 32-bit full-color PNGs. The image files should have

> a transparent background but pure magenta (RGB: 255,0,255) is also treated as transparent.

Reviewer: I think this section needs an introduction to isometric perspective. otherwise the following examples (especially the "template for the area" example) are hard to follow

.. image:: ../images/stonesense-sprite-sample.png
    :align: left

> Here's an example of a typical Stonesense sprite.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be *above* the screenshot that it introduces?

Author: its side by side

Note that, in order not to conflict with neighboring sprites, a sprite must actually be within a smaller

> area than its 32x32 block, typically 30x30.

Reviewer: I don't quite understand this. Why would a sprite that uses its full allocated space "conflict" with its neighboring sprites? The DF sprite sheets have sprites up to their boundary pixels, adjacent to the next sprite over, and there aren't any issues there. What problems does Stonesense have with larger sprites?

Edit: Does this have to do with the layout requirements for isometric perspective? If so, I think that needs to be introduced earlier. Also, is it actually 30x30, or is it the boundary defined by the volume template below?

To illustrate this, here is a template for the area used by sprites:

.. image:: ../images/stonesense-sprite-template.png
    :align: left

The solid area is the floor space taken up by a sprite, while the dotted box indicates the volume above this
area corresponding to one z-level.

The way sprites are loaded is fairly generalized: Sprite sheets, and the index of a sprite within that sheet.

Sprite sheets
-------------

> There can be an arbitrary number of sprite sheets configured for Stonesense, though there are 3 sheets that are

Reviewer: > sprite sheets configured for Stonesense

configured where?

> always present as they contain default sprites (see further down). Most of the content XML files allow users to

Reviewer: > Most of the content XML files

what are content XML files? This might need its own section to explain

specify sprite sheets, and this is done by adding a file attribute to the content nodes. By convention sprite

> sheets should be placed in their appropriate folder, with creature sprite sheets in the creatures folder etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sheets should be placed in the same folder as the XML file that references them.
```

Reviewer: is this suggestion accurate?

Sprite index
------------

> Sprite Index (sometimes referred to as Sheet Index) is a concept for referring to a specific sprite on a sheet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The sprite index, or sheet index, is the zero-indexed offset of a sprite on its sprite sheet.
```

.. _stonesense-art-guide:

Stonesense art creation guide
=============================

Understanding isometric perspective
-----------------------------------

Stonesense uses an isometric perspective, a form of pseudo-3D projection where objects are displayed at an
angle, typically with a 2:1 pixel ratio for diagonal lines. This perspective allows for a detailed and visually
appealing representation of a 3D world using 2D sprites. Unlike traditional top-down views, isometric projection
simulates depth while maintaining a consistent scale without vanishing points.

Understanding sprites
---------------------

Understanding how Stonesense deals with sprites is central to anyone who wishes to modify the content. The
scheme is not very complicated, and this guide will give a short introduction to how they work. With the
exception of floors, which we will discuss later, all sprites are 32x32 pixels big and come in groups known

> as Sprite Sheets. All sprites are loaded and rendered in 32-bit full-color PNGs. The image files should have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as sprite sheets. All sprites are loaded and rendered in 32-bit full-color PNGs. The image files should have
```

a transparent background but pure magenta (RGB: 255,0,255) is also treated as transparent.

.. image:: ../images/stonesense-sprite-sample.png
    :align: left

Here's an example of a typical Stonesense sprite.

When working with Stonesense sprites, it is important to understand how they fit into the isometric grid.
Each sprite is designed to align with the isometric perspective and must fit within a specific bounding area.

> To illustrate this, here is a template for the area used by sprites:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To illustrate this, here is a template for the area that should be used by Stonesense sprites:
```

.. image:: ../images/stonesense-sprite-template.png
    :align: left

The solid area is the floor space taken up by a sprite, while the dotted box indicates the volume above this
area corresponding to one z-level.

> The way sprites are loaded is fairly generalized: Sprite sheets, and the index of a sprite within that sheet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way sprites are loaded is fairly generalized: the name of the sprite sheet, and the index of a sprite within that sheet.
```

Sprite sheets
-------------
There can be an arbitrary number of sprite sheets for Stonesense, though there are 3 sheets that are
always present as they contain default sprites (see further down). Configuring the XML to use new sheets is
outside the scope of this guide but there may be a guide for such added in the future.

Sprite index
------------
The sprite index, or sheet index, is the zero-indexed offset of a sprite on its sprite sheet.
The index starts with the upper left sprite which has index zero. It then increments to the right. Stonesense
is hardcoded to 20 sprites wide sheets, this means that anything past 20 "sprite slots" is ignored, though less
than 20 slots is fine. The first sprite on the second row has index 20, the next row is 40, and so on. This
boundary is hardcoded and changing the size of the sheet will not affect it.

> This image shows how sprites are indexed. Note: Grid added for readability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This image shows how sprites are indexed. Grid added for readability.
```
